DynaSym Educational Materials
================
2025-03-23

**Note that this repository is active and content will change over
time.**

## Summary

This repository hosts educational materials for the research unit
[DynaSym](https://www.dynasym.uni-konstanz.de/). DynaSym is funded by
the German Research Foundation, DFG, see also information on DynaSym
[there](https://gepris.dfg.de/gepris/projekt/528028597?language=en).

DynaSym aims at investigating the dynamics of interactions in symbiotic
partners. In classical (theoretical) community ecology, the direct
interactions are set as static over time; however, the strength and also
the sign of such an interaction may change (Holland, DeAngelis, and
Bronstein 2002; Becks, Gaedke, and Klauschies 2025).

Our research unit aims at understanding the dynamics of species
interactions, especially the density dependence **functional response**,
and the consequences for population dynamics and species coexistence. To
do so, we want to connect experimental approaches and use the insights
to revise existing mathematical models. To assure seamless communication
and exchange of research within our group, we want to provide all
necessary knowledge here, e.g., how to fit functional responses to data
to estimate the strength of species interactions (Rosenbaum and Rall
2018).

This educational repository will cover topics from, e.g., computational
biology, open science, population ecology, statistics, or theoretical
ecology, just to name a few. We will update the contents later.

**Stay tuned for updates!**

## License

Most of the educational materials will be published under the
[**Creative Commons BY
4.0**](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license. The
underlying code will be licensed for instance under the [**GNU General
Public License 3**](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html) or other
software compatible licenses (see code files and chunks for specific
licenses).

## How to cite this repository

We aim at publishing parts of the content like presentations or other
written materials on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) that will allow you
to cite us properly. We will update this section upon a Zenodo release.
If you want to refer to this repository, you can use (for now):

Rall, B.C. (2025): DynaSym Educational Materials.
<https://github.com/b-c-r/DynaSymEducation>

## Author(s)

- Björn C. Rall
  ([0000-0002-3191-8389](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3191-8389))
  - <bjoern.rall@uni-konstanz.de>
  - Aquatic Ecology and Evolution Group, Limnological Institute,
    University of Konstanz, Mainaustraße 252, 78464 Konstanz/Egg,
    Germany

## Links of Interest

- DynaSym homepage: <https://www.dynasym.uni-konstanz.de/>
- DynaSym DFG homepage:
  <https://gepris.dfg.de/gepris/projekt/528028597?language=en>

## Funding Information

- Björn C. Rall gratefully acknowledges the funding by the **German
  Science Foundation (DFG) to the Research Unit DynaSym (FOR 5064)**.

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
entry-spacing="0">

<div id="ref-BecksEtAl2025EmergentFeedbackSymbiosis" class="csl-entry">

Becks, Lutz, Ursula Gaedke, and Toni Klauschies. 2025. “Emergent
Feedback Between Symbiosis Form and Population Dynamics (Accepted).”
*Trends in Ecology & Evolution*.

</div>

<div id="ref-HollandEtAl2002PopulationDynamicsMutualism"
class="csl-entry">

Holland, J. Nathaniel, Donald L. DeAngelis, and Judith L. Bronstein.
2002. “Population Dynamics and Mutualism: Functional Responses of
Benefits and Costs.” *The American Naturalist* 159 (3): 231–44.
<https://doi.org/10.1086/338510>.

</div>

<div id="ref-RosenbaumRall2018FittingFunctionalResponses"
class="csl-entry">

Rosenbaum, Benjamin, and Björn Christian Rall. 2018. “Fitting Functional
Responses: Direct Parameter Estimation by Simulating Differential
Equations.” *Methods in Ecology and Evolution* 9 (10): 2076–90.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.13039>.

</div>

</div>
